6What is Online Learning?
area in Figure 1.1. As you can see from the picture, it can be upper bounded by 1 plus the
integral of 1
t−1 from2toT+ 1. So, we have
TX
t=1
1
t ≤1 +
Z T+1
2
1
t−1 dt= 1 + lnT .
Putting everything together gives the stated bound.
Let’s write in words the steps of the proof: Lemma 1.2 allows us to upper bound the regret
against the single best guess with the regret against the competitor sequencex ⋆
1, . . . , x⋆
T . In
turn, given that we produce in each round the predictionx ⋆
t−1 and|x ⋆
t −x ⋆
t−1|goes to zero
like1/t, the total regret is sublinear in time.
There are a few things to stress about this strategy. The strategy does not have parameters
to tune (e.g., learning rates, regularizers). Note that tuning parameters on validation data,
as we typically do in machine learning, does not make sense in online learning: we have
only one stream of data, and we cannot run our algorithm over it multiple times to select
the best parameter! Also, this strategy does not need to maintain a complete record of the
past, but only a “summary” of it, through the running average. This gives a computationally
efficient algorithm. When we design online learning algorithms, we will strive to achieve all
these characteristics. The final point to stress is that the algorithm does not use gradients:
gradients are useful, and we will use them a lot, but they do not constitute the entire world
of online learning.
Before going on, I want to remind the reader that, as seen above, this is different from the
classic setting in statistical machine learning. So, for example, “overfitting” has no meaning
here. The same holds for “generalization gap” and similar ideas linked to a training/testing
scenario.
In the next chapters, we will introduce several algorithms for online learning, and one of
them will be a strict generalization of the strategy we used in the example above.
1.1 History Bits
The concept of “regret” seems to have been proposed in Savage (1951), an exposition and
review of the book by Wald (1950) on a foundation of statistical decision problems based on
zero-sum two-person games. Savage (1951) introduces the idea of considering the difference
between the utility of the best action in a given state and the utility obtained by any action
under the same state. The proposed optimal strategy was the one minimizing such regret
over the worst possible state. Savage (1951) called this concept “loss” and did not like the
word “regret” because “that term seems to me charged with emotion and liable to lead to
such misinterpretation as that the loss necessarily becomes known” (Savage, 1954, page
163). The name “regret” instead seems to have been suggested in Milnor (1951).
However, Savage’s definition is a modification of the one proposed by Wald (1950), who
instead proposed to maximize the utility directly, under the assumption that the utility of
the best action for any state is 0. While minimizing the regret or minimizing the negative
utility under the assumption of Wald (1950) are mathematically equivalent, Savage (1954,
pages 169–170) explains that Wald considered the regret formulation different from what he
proposed, while Savage attributed to his idea “little or no originality”.
