5
Lower Bounds for Online Linear Optimization
In this chapter, we will present some lower bounds for Online Linear Optimization (OLO).
Since linear losses are convex, this immediately gives us lower bounds for Online Convex
Optimization (OCO). We will consider both the constrained and the unconstrained case. The
lower bounds in this chapter are important because they inform us about which algorithms
are optimal and where the gaps in our knowledge are.
5.1 Lower Bound for Bounded Online Linear Optimization
We will first consider the constrained bounded case. Finding a lower bound amounts to
finding a strategy for the adversary that forces a certain regret onto the algorithm,no matter
what the algorithm does. We will use the probabilistic method to construct our lower bound.
The basic method relies on the fact that if for a givenK∈Rwe can construct a sequence
of random vectors ˜g1, . . . ,˜gT such that
E
" TX
t=1
⟨˜gt,xt⟩
#
≥K,
this implies that there exists a sequenceg 1, . . . ,gT among all the possible random se-
quences such that
TX
t=1
⟨gt,xt⟩ ≥K .
It is easy to see why this is true: if forallsequencesPT
t=1⟨˜gt,xt⟩< K, then the expectation
would also be strictly less thanK, contradicting our assumption.
For us, it means that we prove the existence of a “difficult” sequence of functions through
a result on the expectation with respect to a distribution over stochastic functions. Why do
we rely on expectations rather than actually constructing an adversarial sequence? Because
the use of stochastic loss functions makes it very easy to deal with arbitrary algorithms.
In particular, we will choose a distribution over stochastic loss functions that makes the
expected loss of the algorithm equal to 0, independently of the strategy of the algorithm.
Theorem 5.1LetV ⊂R d be any non-empty bounded closed convex subset. LetD=
maxv,w∈V ∥v−w∥ 2 >0be the diameter ofV. LetAbe any deterministic algorithm for
Online Linear Optimization (OLO) onV. LetTbe any positive integer. Then, there exists a
sequence of vectorsg1, . . . ,gT with∥g t∥2 ≤Landu∈ Vsuch that the regret of algorithm
50
