26Online-to-Batch Conversions
Remark 3.4Using the online-to-batch conversion with online subgradient descent to min-
imize the expectation of convex Lipschitz functions we can obtain a convergence rate of
O( 1√
T ), that is optimal for this class of problems. This should dispel the common miscon-
ception that online algorithms are suboptimal in the stochastic setting because they are
designed to work in the adversarial case. Indeed, the opposite is true: virtually any optimal
guarantee for offline optimization can be recovered using online learning algorithms.
I stressed the fact that the only meaningful way to define a regret is with respect to an ar-
bitrary point in the feasible set. This is obvious in the case where we consider unconstrained
Online Linear Optimization (OLO), because the optimal competitor is unbounded. But, it is
also true in unconstrained OCO. Let’s see an example of this.
Example 3.5Consider a problem of binary classification, with inputsz i ∈R d and outputs
yi ∈ {−1,1}. The loss function is the logistic loss:f(x,(z, y)) = ln(1+exp(−y⟨z,x⟩)).
Suppose that you want to minimize the training loss over a training set ofNsamples,
{(zi, yi)}N
i=1. Also, assume the maximum L 2 norm of the samples isR. That is, we want
to minimize
min
x
 
F(x) := 1
N
NX
i=1
ln(1 + exp(−yi⟨zi,x⟩))
!
.
So, run the reduction described in Theorem 3.1 forTiterations using OSD. In each iteration,
constructℓ t(x) = ln(1 + exp(−y t⟨zt,x⟩))by sampling a training point uniformly at
random from{1, . . . , N}. Setx1 =0andη= 1
R
√
T . We have that
E
"
F
 
1
T
TX
t=1
xt
!#
≤ R
2
√
T
+ min
u∈Rd

F(u) +R ∥u∥2
2
2
√
T

.
In words, we will be R
2
√
T away from the optimal value of the functionFplus aregularizer
∥u∥2
2, where the weight of the regularization is R
2
√
T . Now, let’s consider the case that the
training set is linearly separable, which means that the infimum ofFis 0 and the optimal
solution does not exist, i.e., informally speaking, it has norm equal to infinity. So, any con-
vergence guarantee that depends onx⋆ would be vacuous. On the other hand, our guarantee
above still makes perfect sense.
Note that the above examples only deal with training loss. However, in the next sections
we show a more interesting application of the online-to-batch conversion, that is to directly
minimize the generalization error. Moreover, we will see guarantees in high probability,
rather than just in expectation.
3.1.1 Bits on Concentration Inequalities
We will use a concentration inequality to prove the high probability guarantee, but we will
need to go beyond the sum of i.i.d. random variables. In particular, we will use the concept
ofmartingales.
Let(Ω,(F t)T
t=0,P)be a filtered probability space, whereT∈N∪{∞}, and letZ 0, Z1, . . .
be random variables onΩ. Recall that the sequence(Zt)T
t=0 is adapted ifZt isFt-measurable
for all0≤t≤T.
