214Parameter-free Online Linear Optimization
xt
ℓt(x)
xt
ℓt(x)
Figure 13.1Behaviour of KT (left) and OSD with various learning rates and the
same number of steps (right) whenℓ t(x) =|x−10|for allt.
So, the regret guarantee of KT used as a one-dimensional OCO algorithm is
RegretT (u) =
TX
t=1
(ℓt(xt)−ℓ t(u))≤ |u|L
s
2Tln
e|u|T
ϵ + 1

+ϵL,∀u∈R,
where the only assumption was that the first derivatives (or subderivatives) ofℓt are bounded
in absolute value byL. The bound is almost optimal because the optimal one has
√
Tfactor
inside the logarithm, instead ofT, see the lower bound in Theorem 5.8. Also, it is important
to note that any setting ofϵin[1,
√
T]would not change the asymptotic rate.
To appreciate this guarantee, compare it to the one of OMD with learning rateη= α
L
√
T :
RegretT (u) =
TX
t=1
ℓt(xt)−
TX
t=1
ℓt(u)≤ L
2
u2
α +α
√
T ,∀u∈R.
Hence, the coin-betting approach allows us to get almost the optimal bound, without having
to solve the impossible task to choose the correct learning rate for each competitor, that is,
in aparameter-freeway. This motivates the following definition.
Definition 13.7We callparameter-freeany online algorithm that satisfies the optimal
regret bound with respect toTand to all the comparators in the feasible setV, up to poly-
logarithmic multiplicative factors.
We note explicitly that in this definition, the algorithm is allowed to know the Lipschitz
constant of the losses. Hence, Algorithm 13.2 is parameter-free.
It is also interesting to look at what the algorithm does on an easy problem, whereℓt(x) =
|x−10|. In Figure 13.1, we show the different predictions that the KT and OSD algorithms
make. The convergence rate of OSD critically depends on the learning rate: too large does
not give convergence, and too small slows down the convergence. On the other hand, KT
goesexponentially fasttowards the minimum, and then it automatically backtracks. This
exponential growth effectively works like a line search procedure. Later in the iterations, KT
will oscillate around the minimum,automatically shrinking its steps, without any parameter
