2What is Online Learning?
algorithm, let’s now rewrite (1.1) in an equivalent way:
E
" TX
t=1
(xt −Y t)2
#
−min
x∈[0,1]
E
" TX
t=1
(x−Y t)2
#
.
Now, the last step: let’s remove the assumption on how the data is generated, consider any
arbitrary sequence ofy t, and let’s keep using the same measure of success. If the algorithm
is deterministic, we can remove the expectation because there is no stochasticity anymore.
So, we get that we will win the game if
RegretT :=
TX
t=1
(xt −y t)2 −min
x∈[0,1]
TX
t=1
(x−y t)2
grows sublinearly withT. The quantity above is called theregret, because it measures
how much the algorithm regrets not having played on every round the best single choice in
hindsight. We will denote it byRegret T .
Our reasoning should provide sufficient justification for this metric; however, through-
out this book, we will see that it also makes sense from both a convex optimization and a
machine learning perspective.
Note that in the stochastic case, the optimal strategy is given by a single best prediction, so
it was natural to compare against it. Instead, with arbitrary sequences, it is not clear anymore
that this is a good competitor. For example, we might consider a sequence of competitors
instead of a single one. Indeed, it can be done, but the single competitor is still interesting in
a variety of settings and simpler to explain. So, for most of this book, we will use a single
competitor, while we will consider a sequence of competitors in Chapter 14.
Let’s now generalize the online guessing game, considering that the algorithm outputs a
vectorx t in thevalid set 1 V ⊆R d (also calledfeasible set), and it pays alossℓ t :V →
Rthat measures how good the prediction of the algorithm was in each round. Also, let’s
consider acomparator(also calledcompetitor), that is, an arbitrary predictoruinV ⊆R d
and let’s parameterize the regret with respect to it:Regret T (u). We can now define online
learning: designing and analyzing algorithms to minimize the regret over a sequence of loss
functions with respect to an arbitrary competitoru∈ V ⊆R d:
RegretT (u) :=
TX
t=1
ℓt(xt)−
TX
t=1
ℓt(u).
It is worth stressing that an online algorithm does not knowuor the value of the corre-
sponding regret in order to guarantee an upper bound on the regret. We will say that the
algorithm isno-regretwhen, for every fixedu∈ V, its regret is at most sublinear, that is,
limT→∞ RegretT (u)/T≤0.
Remark 1.1Strictly speaking, the regret is also a function of the lossesℓ 1, . . . , ℓT . How-
ever, we will suppress this dependence for simplicity of notation.
This framework is quite powerful, and it allows us to reformulate a bunch of different
1 In some cases, we can make the game easier for the algorithm by letting it choose the prediction from a set
W ⊃ V.
