1
What is Online Learning?
Consider the following repeated guessing game:
In each roundt= 1, . . . , T
•An adversary chooses a real numbery t ∈[0,1]and keeps it secret;
•You try to guess the real number, choosingx t ∈[0,1];
•The adversary’s number is revealed, and you pay the squared difference(x t −y t)2.
Basically, we want to guess a sequence of numbers as precisely as possible. To make it a
game, we must now define a “winning condition”. Let’s see what makes sense to consider
as a winning condition.
Let’s start by making the game easier for the player. Let’s assume that the adversary is
drawing independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) numbers from some fixed distribution
over[0,1]. However, he is still free to decide which distribution to use at the beginning of the
game. If we knew the distribution, we could just predict the mean of the distribution at each
round, and in expectation we would payσ 2T, whereσ 2 is the variance of the distribution.
We cannot do better than that! However, given that we do not know the distribution, it is
natural to benchmark our strategy with respect to the optimal one. That is, it is natural to
measure the quantity
EY1,...,YT
" TX
t=1
(xt −Y t)2
#
−σ 2T,(1.1)
or, equivalently, considering the average
1
T EY1,...YT
" TX
t=1
(xt −Y t)2
#
−σ 2 .(1.2)
Clearly, these quantities are nonnegative, and they seem to be a good measure, because they
are somehow normalized with respect to the “difficulty” of the numbers generated by the
adversary, through the variance of the distribution. This is not the only possible measure
of our “success”, but it is certainly a reasonable one. It would make sense to consider a
strategy “successful” if the difference in (1.1) grows sublinearly over time and, equivalently,
if the difference in (1.2) goes to zero as the number of roundsTgoes to infinity. That is,
on average over the rounds, we would like our algorithm to be able to approach the optimal
performance.
Minimizing Regret.Having arrived at what seems to be a good measure of success of the
1
