What is Online Learning?3
problems in machine learning and optimization as similar games. More generally, with the
regret framework, we can analyze situations in which the data are not independent draws
from a fixed distribution, yet we would like to guarantee that the algorithm is “learning”
something. For example, online learning can be used to analyze
•Predicting clicks on banners on web pages;
•Routing on a network;
•Convergence to equilibrium of repeated games.
As we will see, it canalsobe used to analyze stochastic optimization algorithms, e.g.,
Stochastic Gradient Descent.
Let’s now go back to our number-guessing game, and let’s try a strategy to win it. Of
course, this is one of the simplest examples of online learning, without a real application. Yet,
going through it, we will uncover most of the key ingredients in online learning algorithms
and their analysis.
A Winning Strategy.Can we win the number guessing game? We can, not only in the
form we described it, but also assuming that the adversary picks his numberafterobserv-
ing our choice. Moreover, we do not assume anything about how the adversary is deciding
the numbers. In fact, the numbers can be chosenadversarially, that is, explicitly trying to
make us lose the game. This is why we will call the mechanism generating the numbers the
adversary.
Now, the fact that the numbers are adversarially chosen means that we can immediately
rule out any strategy based on any statistical modeling of the data. In fact, it cannot work
because the moment we estimate something and act on our estimate, the adversary can im-
mediately change the way the data is generated, ruining us. So, we have to think about
something else. Yet, surprisingly enough, many times online learning algorithms will look
like classic ones from statistical estimation, even if they work for different reasons.
Now, let’s try to design a strategy to make the regret provably sublinear in time,regardless
of how the adversary chooses the numbers. The first thing we do is to take a look at the
best strategy in hindsight, that is, the argmin of the second term of the regret. It should be
immediate to see that
x⋆
T := argmin
x∈[0,1]
TX
t=1
(x−y t)2 = 1
T
TX
t=1
yt .
Now, given that we do not know the future, for sure, we cannot usex ⋆
T as our guess in each
round. However, we do know the past, so a reasonable strategy in each round could be to
output the best number over the past. Why would such a strategy work? For sure, the reason
why it could work is not that we expect the future to be like the past, because it is not true!
Instead, we want to leverage the fact that the optimal guess over time cannot change too
much between rounds, so we can try to “track” it over time.
Hence, on each roundt≥2, our strategy is to guessx t =x ⋆
t−1 = 1
t−1
Pt−1
i=1 yi, and
in the first round we guess any number between 0 and 1. Such a strategy is usually called
Follow-the-Leader (FTL), because you are following what would have been the optimal
thing to do on the past rounds (i.e., the leader).
Let’s now try to show that this strategy will allow us to win the game. Given that this is
