2.1 Online Learning with Convex Differentiable Losses9
learning algorithm is able to guarantee a sublinear regret, it means that its performance on
average will approach the performance of any fixed strategy. As said, we will see that in
many situations, if the adversary is “weak”, for example, it is a fixed stochastic distribution
over the loss functions, being prepared for the worst-case scenario will not preclude us from
getting the best guarantee anyway.
For a while, we will focus on the case thatℓ t are convex, and this problem will be called
Online Convex Optimization (OCO). Later, we will see how toconvexifysome specific
non-convex online problems.
Remark 2.1I will now introduce some math concepts. If you have a background in Con-
vex Analysis, this will be easy stuff for you. On the other hand, if you have never seen these
things before, they might look a bit scary. Let me tell you the right way to look at them:these
are tools that will make our job easier. Without these tools, it would be basically impossible
to design any online learning algorithm. And, no, it is not enough to test the algorithms on
some machine learning dataset, because fixed datasets are not adversarial. Without a cor-
rect proof, you might not realize that your online algorithm fails on particular sequences of
losses, as it happened with Adam (Reddi et al., 2018). I promise you that once you under-
stand the key mathematical concepts, online learning is actually easy.
2.1.1 Convex Analysis Bits: Convexity
Figure 2.1Non-convex (left) and convex (right) sets.
Definition 2.2V ⊆R d isconvexif for anyx,y∈ Vand anyλ∈(0,1), we have
λx+ (1−λ)y∈ V.
In words, this means that the setVhas no ‘holes’ or inward dents, see Figure 2.1.
We will make use ofextended-real-valued functions, that is, functions that take values
inR∪ {−∞,+∞}. Forfan extended-real-valued function onR d, itsdomainis the set
domf={x∈R d :f(x)<+∞}.
Extended-real-valued functions allow us to easily consider constrained sets and are a stan-
dard notation in Convex Optimization (see, e.g., Boyd and Vandenberghe, 2004). For exam-
ple, if I want the predictions of the algorithmxt and the competitoruto be in a setV ⊂Rd, I
can just addι V(x)to all the losses, whereι V :R d →(−∞,+∞]is theindicator function
of the setVdefined as
ιV(x) =
(
0,x∈ V,
+∞,otherwise.
10Online Subgradient Descent
domf
Epigraph
x
f(x)
domf
Epigraph
x
f(x)
Figure 2.2Convex (left) and nonconvex (right) functions.
In this way, the only way for the algorithm and for the competitor to suffer finite loss is to
predict inside the setV. Also, extended-real-valued functions will make the use ofFenchel
conjugatesmore direct, see Section 6.4.1.
Convex functionswill be an essential ingredient in online learning.
Definition 2.3Letf:R d →[−∞,+∞].fisconvexif the epigraph of the function,
{(x, y)∈Rd+1 :y≥f(x)}, is convex.
We can see a visualization of this definition in Figure 2.2. Note that the definition implies
that the domain of a convex function is convex. TheιV(x)is convex iffVis convex, so each
convex set is associated with a convex function. Also, observe that iff:R d →(−∞,+∞]
is convex,f+ι V :R d →(−∞,+∞], whereVis convex, is also convex.
The definition above gives rise to the following characterization for convex functions that
do not assume the value−∞.
Theorem 2.4(Rockafellar, 1970, Theorem 4.1)Letf:R d →(−∞,+∞]be such that
domfis a convex set. Thenfis convex iff, for any0< λ <1, we have
f(λx+ (1−λ)y)≤λf(x) + (1−λ)f(y),∀x,y∈domf .
Example 2.5Affine functions,f(x) =⟨z,x⟩+b, are convex.
Example 2.6Norms are always convex; the proof is left as an exercise.
How to recognize a convex function? In the most general case, you have to rely on its def-
inition. However, most of the time, we will recognize them as being obtained by operations
that preserve convexity. For example:
•Iffandgare convex, then their linear combination with non-negative weights is also
convex.
•The composition with an affine transformation preserves the convexity.
•Iff:R d →Randg:R→Rare convex functions andgis non-decreasing, then
h(x) =g(f(x))is convex.
•The pointwise supremum of convex functions is convex.
