PHYSICAL PDF PAGE 13
1
What is Online Learning?
Consider the following repeated guessing game:
In each roundt= 1, . . . , T
•An adversary chooses a real numbery t ∈[0,1]and keeps it secret;
•You try to guess the real number, choosingx t ∈[0,1];
•The adversary’s number is revealed, and you pay the squared difference(x t −y t)2.
Basically, we want to guess a sequence of numbers as precisely as possible. To make it a
game, we must now define a “winning condition”. Let’s see what makes sense to consider
as a winning condition.
Let’s start by making the game easier for the player. Let’s assume that the adversary is
drawing independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) numbers from some fixed distribution
over[0,1]. However, he is still free to decide which distribution to use at the beginning of the
game. If we knew the distribution, we could just predict the mean of the distribution at each
round, and in expectation we would payσ 2T, whereσ 2 is the variance of the distribution.
We cannot do better than that! However, given that we do not know the distribution, it is
natural to benchmark our strategy with respect to the optimal one. That is, it is natural to
measure the quantity
EY1,...,YT
" TX
t=1
(xt −Y t)2
#
−σ 2T,(1.1)
or, equivalently, considering the average
1
T EY1,...YT
" TX
t=1
(xt −Y t)2
#
−σ 2 .(1.2)
Clearly, these quantities are nonnegative, and they seem to be a good measure, because they
are somehow normalized with respect to the “difficulty” of the numbers generated by the
adversary, through the variance of the distribution. This is not the only possible measure
of our “success”, but it is certainly a reasonable one. It would make sense to consider a
strategy “successful” if the difference in (1.1) grows sublinearly over time and, equivalently,
if the difference in (1.2) goes to zero as the number of roundsTgoes to infinity. That is,
on average over the rounds, we would like our algorithm to be able to approach the optimal
performance.
Minimizing Regret.Having arrived at what seems to be a good measure of success of the
1

PHYSICAL PDF PAGE 14
2What is Online Learning?
algorithm, let’s now rewrite (1.1) in an equivalent way:
E
" TX
t=1
(xt −Y t)2
#
−min
x∈[0,1]
E
" TX
t=1
(x−Y t)2
#
.
Now, the last step: let’s remove the assumption on how the data is generated, consider any
arbitrary sequence ofy t, and let’s keep using the same measure of success. If the algorithm
is deterministic, we can remove the expectation because there is no stochasticity anymore.
So, we get that we will win the game if
RegretT :=
TX
t=1
(xt −y t)2 −min
x∈[0,1]
TX
t=1
(x−y t)2
grows sublinearly withT. The quantity above is called theregret, because it measures
how much the algorithm regrets not having played on every round the best single choice in
hindsight. We will denote it byRegret T .
Our reasoning should provide sufficient justification for this metric; however, through-
out this book, we will see that it also makes sense from both a convex optimization and a
machine learning perspective.
Note that in the stochastic case, the optimal strategy is given by a single best prediction, so
it was natural to compare against it. Instead, with arbitrary sequences, it is not clear anymore
that this is a good competitor. For example, we might consider a sequence of competitors
instead of a single one. Indeed, it can be done, but the single competitor is still interesting in
a variety of settings and simpler to explain. So, for most of this book, we will use a single
competitor, while we will consider a sequence of competitors in Chapter 14.
Let’s now generalize the online guessing game, considering that the algorithm outputs a
vectorx t in thevalid set 1 V ⊆Rd (also calledfeasible set), and it pays alossℓ t :V →
Rthat measures how good the prediction of the algorithm was in each round. Also, let’s
consider acomparator(also calledcompetitor), that is, an arbitrary predictoruinV ⊆R d
and let’s parameterize the regret with respect to it:Regret T (u). We can now define online
learning: designing and analyzing algorithms to minimize the regret over a sequence of loss
functions with respect to an arbitrary competitoru∈ V ⊆Rd:
RegretT (u) :=
TX
t=1
ℓt(xt)−
TX
t=1
ℓt(u).
It is worth stressing that an online algorithm does not knowuor the value of the corre-
sponding regret in order to guarantee an upper bound on the regret. We will say that the
algorithm isno-regretwhen, for every fixedu∈ V, its regret is at most sublinear, that is,
limT→∞ RegretT (u)/T≤0.
Remark 1.1Strictly speaking, the regret is also a function of the lossesℓ 1, . . . , ℓT . How-
ever, we will suppress this dependence for simplicity of notation.
This framework is quite powerful, and it allows us to reformulate a bunch of different
1 In some cases, we can make the game easier for the algorithm by letting it choose the prediction from a set
W ⊃ V.

PHYSICAL PDF PAGE 15
What is Online Learning?3
problems in machine learning and optimization as similar games. More generally, with the
regret framework, we can analyze situations in which the data are not independent draws
from a fixed distribution, yet we would like to guarantee that the algorithm is “learning”
something. For example, online learning can be used to analyze
•Predicting clicks on banners on web pages;
•Routing on a network;
•Convergence to equilibrium of repeated games.
As we will see, it canalsobe used to analyze stochastic optimization algorithms, e.g.,
Stochastic Gradient Descent.
Let’s now go back to our number-guessing game, and let’s try a strategy to win it. Of
course, this is one of the simplest examples of online learning, without a real application. Yet,
going through it, we will uncover most of the key ingredients in online learning algorithms
and their analysis.
A Winning Strategy.Can we win the number guessing game? We can, not only in the
form we described it, but also assuming that the adversary picks his numberafterobserv-
ing our choice. Moreover, we do not assume anything about how the adversary is deciding
the numbers. In fact, the numbers can be chosenadversarially, that is, explicitly trying to
make us lose the game. This is why we will call the mechanism generating the numbers the
adversary.
Now, the fact that the numbers are adversarially chosen means that we can immediately
rule out any strategy based on any statistical modeling of the data. In fact, it cannot work
because the moment we estimate something and act on our estimate, the adversary can im-
mediately change the way the data is generated, ruining us. So, we have to think about
something else. Yet, surprisingly enough, many times online learning algorithms will look
like classic ones from statistical estimation, even if they work for different reasons.
Now, let’s try to design a strategy to make the regret provably sublinear in time,regardless
of how the adversary chooses the numbers. The first thing we do is to take a look at the
best strategy in hindsight, that is, the argmin of the second term of the regret. It should be
immediate to see that
x⋆
T := argmin
x∈[0,1]
TX
t=1
(x−y t)2 = 1
T
TX
t=1
yt .
Now, given that we do not know the future, for sure, we cannot usex ⋆
T as our guess in each
round. However, we do know the past, so a reasonable strategy in each round could be to
output the best number over the past. Why would such a strategy work? For sure, the reason
why it could work is not that we expect the future to be like the past, because it is not true!
Instead, we want to leverage the fact that the optimal guess over time cannot change too
much between rounds, so we can try to “track” it over time.
Hence, on each roundt≥2, our strategy is to guessx t =x ⋆
t−1 = 1
t−1
Pt−1
i=1 yi, and
in the first round we guess any number between 0 and 1. Such a strategy is usually called
Follow-the-Leader (FTL), because you are following what would have been the optimal
thing to do on the past rounds (i.e., the leader).
Let’s now try to show that this strategy will allow us to win the game. Given that this is

PHYSICAL PDF PAGE 27
2.1 Online Learning with Convex Differentiable Losses15
have to consider the expression
∥u−x 1∥2
2
2η + η
2
TX
t=1
∥gt∥2
2
and minimize with respect toη. It is easy to see that the optimalηis ∥u−x1∥2√PT
t=1 ∥gt∥2
2
, that would
give the regret bound
∥u−x 1∥2
vuut
TX
t=1
∥gt∥2
2 .
However, we have a problem: in order to use this stepsize, we should know all the future gra-
dients (that depend onηitself!), and the distance between the optimal solution and the initial
point. This is clearly impossible: remember that the adversary can choose the sequence of
functions. Hence, it can observe your choice of learning rates and decide the sequence so
that your learning rate is no longer the correct one!
Indeed, it turns out that this kind of rate is completely impossible because it is ruled out by
a lower bound we will show in Chapter 5. Yet, we will see that it is indeed possible to achieve
very similar rates usingadaptive(Section 4.2) andparameter-freealgorithms (Chapter 13).
For the moment, we can observe that we might be happy to minimize a loose upper bound.
In particular, assume that the norm of the gradients is bounded byL, that is∥g t∥2 ≤L.
Also, assuming a bounded diameter, we can upper bound∥u−x 1∥2 byD. Hence, we have
η⋆ = argmin
η
D2
2η + ηL2T
2 = D
L
√
T
,
that gives a regret bound of
DL
√
T .(2.1)
So, indeed, the regret is sublinear in time. In Chapter 5, we will also prove that the this regret
upper bound is optimal up to constant multiplicative factors.
Example 2.14Consider the guessing game of the first chapter; we can easily solve it with
OGD. Indeed, we just need to calculate the gradients, prove that they are bounded, and find
a way to calculate the projection of a real number in[0,1]. So,ℓ ′
t(x) = 2(x−y t), that is
bounded forx, yt ∈[0,1]. The projection on[0,1]is justΠ [0,1](x) = min(max(x,0),1).
With the optimal learning rate, the resulting regret would beO(
√
T), which is worse than
the one we found in the first chapter. Hence, OGD with this choice of the learning rate is
suboptimal for this problem. We will see how to make it optimal in Chapter 4.
Example 2.15Let’s consider an example of the OCO setting. Consider the problem of
predicting at daytthe opening price of a stock based on a linear combination of the opening
prices of the pastddays, represented by a vectorz t ∈R d. So, our prediction at timetwill
be⟨z t,xt⟩and the feasible set isV=R d. Once we make our prediction, we receive the
true opening pricey t, and we pay theHuber loss, a convex loss function robust to outliers,

PHYSICAL PDF PAGE 31
2.2 Online Subgradient Descent19
We also have a handy result that upper bounds the norm of subgradients of convexLips-
chitzfunctions.
Definition 2.29Letf:R d →(−∞,+∞]. We say thatfisL-Lipschitzover a set
V ⊆domfwith respect to a norm∥ · ∥if|f(x)−f(y)| ≤L∥x−y∥,∀x,y∈ V.
Theorem 2.30Letf:R d →(−∞,+∞]be convex and proper. Then,fisL-Lipschitz in
int domfwith respect to the L 2 norm iff for allx∈int domfandg∈∂f(x)we have
∥g∥2 ≤L.
ProofFirst, we assumefto beL-Lipschitz, then|f(x)−f(y)| ≤L∥x−y∥ 2,∀x,y∈
int domf. Letg∈∂f(x). If∥g∥ 2 = 0, then the theorem is true. So, we can safely assume
it to be different from 0. Forϵ >0small enoughy=x+ϵ g
∥g∥2
∈int domf, then
Lϵ=L∥x−y∥ 2 ≥ |f(y)−f(x)| ≥f(y)−f(x)≥ ⟨g,y−x⟩=ϵ∥g∥ 2,
that implies that∥g∥ 2 ≤L.
For the other implication, the subgradient definition and Cauchy–Schwarz inequality give
f(x)−f(y)≤ ∥g∥ 2∥x−y∥ 2 ≤L∥x−y∥ 2,
for anyx,y∈int domf. Takingg∈∂f(y), we also get
f(y)−f(x)≤L∥x−y∥ 2 .
Finally, let’s dispel the common misconception that a convex function must be differen-
tiable on its domain except possibly at countably many points. For example, consider the
convex functionf:R 2 →Rdefined asf(x) =|x 1|that is not differentiable on the line
segment betweenv= (0,0)andw= (0,1).
2.2.2 Analysis with Subgradients
As I promised you, with the proper mathematical tools, analyzing online algorithms becomes
easy. Indeed, switching from gradient to subgradient comes for free! In fact, our analysis of
OGD with differentiable losses holds as is when using subgradients instead of gradients. The
reason is that the only property of the gradients that we used in the proof of Theorem 2.13
was that
ℓt(xt)−ℓ t(u)≤ ⟨gt,xt −u⟩,
whereg t =∇ℓ t(xt). However, the exact same property holds wheng t ∈∂ℓ t(xt). Hence,
the regret bounds we proved hold as well, just replacing differentiability with subdifferen-
tiability and gradients with subgradients. In particular, we have the following lemma.
Lemma 2.31LetV ⊆R d be a non-empty closed convex set,ℓ t :R d →(−∞,+∞]a
function subdifferentiable onV, andη t >0. Setg t ∈∂ℓ t(xt)andx t+1 = ΠV(xt −η tgt).
Then,∀u∈ V, we have
ηt(ℓt(xt)−ℓ t(u))≤η t⟨gt,xt −u⟩ ≤1
2∥xt −u∥ 2
2 − 1
2∥xt+1 −u∥ 2
2 + η2
t
2 ∥gt∥2
2 .

PHYSICAL PDF PAGE 32
20Online Subgradient Descent
Algorithm 2.2Projected Online Subgradient Descent (OSD)
Require:Non-empty closed convex setV ⊆R d,x 1 ∈ V,η1, . . . , ηT >0
1:fort= 1toTdo
2:Outputx t ∈ V
3:Pay the lossℓ t(xt), whereℓ t is subdifferentiable onV
4:Setg t ∈∂ℓ t(xt)
5:x t+1 = ΠV(xt −η tgt) = argminy∈V ∥xt −η tgt −y∥ 2
6:end for
So, we can state theOnline Subgradient Descent (OSD)algorithm in Algorithm 2.2,
where the only difference from Algorithm 2.1 is line 4.
Example 2.32Consider the guessing game of the first chapter again, but now change the
loss function to the absolute loss of the difference:ℓ t(x) =|x−y t|. Now we will need to
use OSD, because the functions are non-differentiable. We can easily see that
∂ℓt(x) =



{1}, x > y t
[−1,1], x=y t
{−1}, x < yt .
Again, running OSD with the optimal learning rate on this problem will give us immediately
a regret ofO(
√
T)asT→ ∞, without having to design a specific strategy for it.
2.2.3 Unit Analysis Bits
One might wonder why I did not “simplify the math” by removing some of the constants in
the bounds, for example, by setting the Lipschitz constantLto1. While this is very common
in machine learning papers, this is a bad idea because it makes it (i) difficult to check the
correctness of an equation, and (ii) difficult to correctly implement the algorithm. To explain
why this is the case, we will have to consider the concepts of “units”.
When we look at a mathematical formula coming from a physical model, we are used
to the idea that each quantity has a “unit” of measurement, e.g., meters, seconds, Joules.
A fundamental principle is that any physically meaningful equation must be dimensionally
consistent. That is, the units on the left-hand side of an equation must be the same as the
units on the right-hand side. For example, you cannot sum a quantity measured in meters
with one measured in seconds.
It turns out that this simple idea is not limited to physical models and it can be used as
a sanity check foranymathematical formula, including the ones we see in online learning.
Let’s assign a symbolic unit to each quantity we are dealing with. For example, let’s denote
the units of our predictionsxby[x]and the units of the lossℓby[ℓ]. We can now check
each formula by following a few simple rules. First, we have to make sure that each term
has the same units. Another rule to keep in mind is that transcendental functions are only
defined on unitless quantities. So, for example, we can take logarithms and exponentials of
ratios of quantities with the same units, to obtain a unitless quantity, but not of quantities