2.1 Online Learning with Convex Differentiable Losses15
have to consider the expression
∥u−x 1∥2
2
2η + η
2
TX
t=1
∥gt∥2
2
and minimize with respect toη. It is easy to see that the optimalηis ∥u−x1∥2√PT
t=1 ∥gt∥2
2
, that would
give the regret bound
∥u−x 1∥2
vuut
TX
t=1
∥gt∥2
2 .
However, we have a problem: in order to use this stepsize, we should know all the future gra-
dients (that depend onηitself!), and the distance between the optimal solution and the initial
point. This is clearly impossible: remember that the adversary can choose the sequence of
functions. Hence, it can observe your choice of learning rates and decide the sequence so
that your learning rate is no longer the correct one!
Indeed, it turns out that this kind of rate is completely impossible because it is ruled out by
a lower bound we will show in Chapter 5. Yet, we will see that it is indeed possible to achieve
very similar rates usingadaptive(Section 4.2) andparameter-freealgorithms (Chapter 13).
For the moment, we can observe that we might be happy to minimize a loose upper bound.
In particular, assume that the norm of the gradients is bounded byL, that is∥g t∥2 ≤L.
Also, assuming a bounded diameter, we can upper bound∥u−x 1∥2 byD. Hence, we have
η⋆ = argmin
η
D2
2η + ηL2T
2 = D
L
√
T
,
that gives a regret bound of
DL
√
T .(2.1)
So, indeed, the regret is sublinear in time. In Chapter 5, we will also prove that the this regret
upper bound is optimal up to constant multiplicative factors.
Example 2.14Consider the guessing game of the first chapter; we can easily solve it with
OGD. Indeed, we just need to calculate the gradients, prove that they are bounded, and find
a way to calculate the projection of a real number in[0,1]. So,ℓ ′
t(x) = 2(x−y t), that is
bounded forx, yt ∈[0,1]. The projection on[0,1]is justΠ [0,1](x) = min(max(x,0),1).
With the optimal learning rate, the resulting regret would beO(
√
T), which is worse than
the one we found in the first chapter. Hence, OGD with this choice of the learning rate is
suboptimal for this problem. We will see how to make it optimal in Chapter 4.
Example 2.15Let’s consider an example of the OCO setting. Consider the problem of
predicting at daytthe opening price of a stock based on a linear combination of the opening
prices of the pastddays, represented by a vectorz t ∈R d. So, our prediction at timetwill
be⟨z t,xt⟩and the feasible set isV=R d. Once we make our prediction, we receive the
true opening pricey t, and we pay theHuber loss, a convex loss function robust to outliers,
