2.5 Exercises23
Projected OGD with time-varying learning rate and the name “Online Convex Optimiza-
tion” were introduced by Zinkevich (2003), but the OCO framework was introduced earlier
by Gordon (1999a,b), which also introduced the idea of reducing OCO to OLO.
Before the OCO framework, the online learning community focused on specific losses
and mostly linear predictors, see Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi (2006). Moreover, the concept
of subgradients is also a recent addition to the online learning literature, and the earliest
papers using subgradients of loss functions seem to be Zhang (2004); Shalev-Shwartz and
Singer (2006b). However, subgradients were implicitly used in previous analyses too, see
for example Cesa-Bianchi (1999, Theorem 4).
It is impossible not to notice that the literature on OCO is heavily biased toward the use of
bounded domains. Yet, there are very few practical applications of OCO where the domain
is bounded. Moreover, as shown in Theorem 2.13, it is possible to have a sublinear regret
even in unbounded domains. I speculate that the insistence on using bounded domains is
due to two main reasons: (i) the less general definition of regret (derived from the setting of
learning with experts (Section 6.8)) as
TX
t=1
ℓt(xt)−min
u∈V
TX
t=1
ℓt(u)
that requires the existence of a minimizer of the sum of the losses, and (ii) the fact that OSD
with time-varying learning rates has a vacuous regret upper bound on unbounded domains.
However, we now know that both issues can easily be fixed: (i) by defining the regret with
respect to arbitrary competitors, and (ii) by using different algorithms, for example Follow-
the-Regularized-Leader (FTRL) which we will see in Chapter 7. Indeed, even in offline
optimization, the existence of a minimizer is not required to guarantee that the suboptimality
gap goes to zero, as we will see in Example 3.2. So, it is probably time for the community
to stop using the crutch of bounded domains just to avoid technical difficulties.
2.5 Exercises
Problem 2.1Prove that PT
t=1
1√
t ≤2
√
T−1.
Problem 2.2Using the inequality in the previous exercise, prove that the learning rate
ηt = D
L
√
t gives rise to a regret only a constant multiplicative factor worse than the one in
(2.1).
Problem 2.3Calculate the subdifferential set of theϵ-insensitive loss:f(x) = max(|x−
y| −ϵ,0). It is a loss used in regression problems where we do not want to penalize predic-
tionsxwithin±ϵof the correct valuey.
Problem 2.4Using the definition of subgradient, find the subdifferential set off(x) =
∥x∥2,x∈R d.
Problem 2.5Consider Projected Online Subgradient Descent for the Example 2.10 on the
failure of Follow-the-Leader: can we use it on that problem? Would it guarantee sublinear
regret? How would the behaviour of the algorithm differ from FTL?
