2
Online Subgradient Descent
In this chapter, we will introduce the Online Subgradient Descent (OSD) algorithm: a generic
online algorithm to solve online problems with convex losses. First, we will introduce On-
line Gradient Descent (OGD) for convex differentiable functions, then we will extend it to
non-differentiable functions.
2.1 Online Learning with Convex Differentiable Losses
To summarize what we said in the first chapter, let’s define online learning as the following
general game:
•Fort= 1, . . . , T
–Outputx t ∈ V ⊆R d
–Pay the lossℓ t(xt), whereℓ t :V →R
–Receive some feedback onℓ t
•End for
The aim of this game is to minimize the regret with respect to any competitoru∈ V:
RegretT (u) :=
TX
t=1
ℓt(xt)−
TX
t=1
ℓt(u).
We also said that the way the lossesℓ t are decided is adversarial. Now, without making any
additional assumptions, we cannot hope to solve this problem. Hence, we must understand
what reasonable assumptions we can make. Typically, we will try to restrict the choice of
the loss functions in some way. This is considered reasonable because most of the time,
we have some say in deciding the set from which the loss functions are picked. So, for
example, we will consider onlyconvexloss functions. However, convexity might not be
enough, so we might restrict the class a bit more to, for example, convex functions with
bounded gradients. On the other hand, assuming knowledge of something about the future
is not considered a reasonable assumption, because we very rarely have any control over the
future. In general, the stronger the assumptions, the better the guarantee on the regret will
be. The best algorithms we will see will guarantee a sublinear regret against the weakest
assumption we can make, guaranteeingat the same timea smaller regret foreasyadversaries.
It is also important to remember why minimizing regret is a good objective: given that we
do not assume anything about how the adversary generates the loss functions, minimizing
regret is a good metric that takes into account the difficulty of the problem. If an online
8
