2.1 Online Learning with Convex Differentiable Losses9
learning algorithm is able to guarantee a sublinear regret, it means that its performance on
average will approach the performance of any fixed strategy. As said, we will see that in
many situations, if the adversary is “weak”, for example, it is a fixed stochastic distribution
over the loss functions, being prepared for the worst-case scenario will not preclude us from
getting the best guarantee anyway.
For a while, we will focus on the case thatℓ t are convex, and this problem will be called
Online Convex Optimization (OCO). Later, we will see how toconvexifysome specific
non-convex online problems.
Remark 2.1I will now introduce some math concepts. If you have a background in Con-
vex Analysis, this will be easy stuff for you. On the other hand, if you have never seen these
things before, they might look a bit scary. Let me tell you the right way to look at them:these
are tools that will make our job easier. Without these tools, it would be basically impossible
to design any online learning algorithm. And, no, it is not enough to test the algorithms on
some machine learning dataset, because fixed datasets are not adversarial. Without a cor-
rect proof, you might not realize that your online algorithm fails on particular sequences of
losses, as it happened with Adam (Reddi et al., 2018). I promise you that once you under-
stand the key mathematical concepts, online learning is actually easy.
2.1.1 Convex Analysis Bits: Convexity
Figure 2.1Non-convex (left) and convex (right) sets.
Definition 2.2V ⊆R d isconvexif for anyx,y∈ Vand anyλ∈(0,1), we have
λx+ (1−λ)y∈ V.
In words, this means that the setVhas no ‘holes’ or inward dents, see Figure 2.1.
We will make use ofextended-real-valued functions, that is, functions that take values
inR∪ {−∞,+∞}. Forfan extended-real-valued function onR d, itsdomainis the set
domf={x∈R d :f(x)<+∞}.
Extended-real-valued functions allow us to easily consider constrained sets and are a stan-
dard notation in Convex Optimization (see, e.g., Boyd and Vandenberghe, 2004). For exam-
ple, if I want the predictions of the algorithmxt and the competitoruto be in a setV ⊂R d, I
can just addι V(x)to all the losses, whereι V :R d →(−∞,+∞]is theindicator function
of the setVdefined as
ιV(x) =
(
0,x∈ V,
+∞,otherwise.
