20Online Subgradient Descent
Algorithm 2.2Projected Online Subgradient Descent (OSD)
Require:Non-empty closed convex setV ⊆R d,x 1 ∈ V,η 1, . . . , ηT >0
1:fort= 1toTdo
2:Outputx t ∈ V
3:Pay the lossℓ t(xt), whereℓ t is subdifferentiable onV
4:Setg t ∈∂ℓ t(xt)
5:x t+1 = ΠV(xt −η tgt) = argminy∈V ∥xt −η tgt −y∥ 2
6:end for
So, we can state theOnline Subgradient Descent (OSD)algorithm in Algorithm 2.2,
where the only difference from Algorithm 2.1 is line 4.
Example 2.32Consider the guessing game of the first chapter again, but now change the
loss function to the absolute loss of the difference:ℓ t(x) =|x−y t|. Now we will need to
use OSD, because the functions are non-differentiable. We can easily see that
∂ℓt(x) =



{1}, x > y t
[−1,1], x=y t
{−1}, x < y t .
Again, running OSD with the optimal learning rate on this problem will give us immediately
a regret ofO(
√
T)asT→ ∞, without having to design a specific strategy for it.
2.2.3 Unit Analysis Bits
One might wonder why I did not “simplify the math” by removing some of the constants in
the bounds, for example, by setting the Lipschitz constantLto1. While this is very common
in machine learning papers, this is a bad idea because it makes it (i) difficult to check the
correctness of an equation, and (ii) difficult to correctly implement the algorithm. To explain
why this is the case, we will have to consider the concepts of “units”.
When we look at a mathematical formula coming from a physical model, we are used
to the idea that each quantity has a “unit” of measurement, e.g., meters, seconds, Joules.
A fundamental principle is that any physically meaningful equation must be dimensionally
consistent. That is, the units on the left-hand side of an equation must be the same as the
units on the right-hand side. For example, you cannot sum a quantity measured in meters
with one measured in seconds.
It turns out that this simple idea is not limited to physical models and it can be used as
a sanity check foranymathematical formula, including the ones we see in online learning.
Let’s assign a symbolic unit to each quantity we are dealing with. For example, let’s denote
the units of our predictionsxby[x]and the units of the lossℓby[ℓ]. We can now check
each formula by following a few simple rules. First, we have to make sure that each term
has the same units. Another rule to keep in mind is that transcendental functions are only
defined on unitless quantities. So, for example, we can take logarithms and exponentials of
ratios of quantities with the same units, to obtain a unitless quantity, but not of quantities
